# Internals

[TOC]



## Introduction

<!-- Todo: sketch flow -->

### `logger.ts`

initialises logger, reads environmental variables

### `mod.ts`

Entry point, parses CLI flags, loads config through `config.ts` and builds files through `build.ts`.

### `config.ts`

Loads config from config file if available, else provides default config.

### `build.ts`

Validates directories, loads files, copies assets, loads global data, loads layouts, loads templates, processes templates, writes templates

#### ...







## Templates and Layouts

<!-- todo: check that above is implemented correctly, no references to template that would prevent it from being GC -->

No restriction on data in templates, layouts, globals, user need to make sure that merges well with mergeFunction, just don't use if is `undefined`.
no validation on data, user has to deal with a useful/-less merge

For each layout merges data over all it's chain. Also merges in global data. Because saves computations if multiple templates depend on same layout, because layout chain doesn't change.

All layouts are read into memory, because assumes has few layouts and many templates for a given layout. Templates are only read one after the other into memory.
For each template processes in parallel using map() and awaiting Promise.all(), instead of sequential for loop. Also writes out immediately and doesn't save mergedData and renderedContent on template file, such that it can be garbage collected as soon as function call of a template is completed.


## Paths

Paths aren't validated except that they are a string, non-empty and non-whitespace only, 
and do not contain `..` to not escape the current working directory. Because legal characters may vary by platform it's easier to just try to read/write and throw an error if it fails.

<!-- todo: check that above is implemented for all paths: configPath from argument, paths from config file, paths from data properties, etc. -->


## Build

Loads all globals, then merges them
Loads all layouts, then for each merges own chain, also with globals