# Templates

[TOC]

<!-- todo: finish -->


## Introduction

- content files
- in goose, these can be `.md` or `.html` files NO!OLD

Templates are files that will get outputted. This is a very general definition, but as we will see a very powerful one.

In goose, templates are written in JavaScript. This might seem weird at first, but it allows for ultimate flexibility as the templating language is a real programming language. You will never again miss any features that are only available in a full programming language. Also you don't have to learn yet another template language, because you already know JavaScript.

A template is any file in the source folder with a double extension that ends on `.*.js`, that is not in in the layouts or data directory and also not ignored. It doesn't need to be HTML, it could be anything else, including CSS and even JavaScript by giving it a `.js.js` extension. It is entirely up to you what file a template should represent. Powerful!

A template must export a `render` function that returns a string. It's entirely up to you how you assemble this string, you can use any computations you like and tap into the whole JavaScript ecosystem. Powerful! Note, the render function can not be async (unlike a global data export function).

Note, the double extension convention imposes a slight restriction on the filename of any `.js` file that is not a template, because if your `.js` filen contains dots in the filename it will be interpreted as a template. But as long as it's a template, you can use as many dots as you like in the filename, as only the last two are relevant, e.g. `some.file.html.js`. Note, a hidden `.js` file which doesn't contain more dots besides a leading dot is correctly interpreted as asset, e.g. `.hidden_file.js`.

Also goose doesn't make any assumptions about the file type of the template. By default, the outputted file has the second extension - as if the `.js` was stripped - but the outputted file could have an entirely different file type using targetPaths, as we'll see in a moment.

Besides computing data on the fly, a template can also use "data properties" from an exported `data` object. For a isolated template this doesn't seem very useful, as you could just define these properties in the `render` function, but with become useful with chained layouts as we will see later.

In a template, a few data properties get special treatment. The `targetPath` data property can customise the output path relative to the output directory as well as the file type by means of the extension. By default, the file type is `.html` and the output path is the same relative path in the target directory. The `layoutPath` data property specifies the path of the layout relative to the layout directory. By default, no layout is used.

<!-- todo: special properties are now set using methods on a `settings` object passed as argument to the `data` function, return value is reused untransformed as data -->

<!-- NO? YES? Both special properties are still part of the data object. -->

A template doesn't need to be complete. It can use layouts to wrap itself. A template can chain onto exactly one layout by specifying the path in the `template` data property. This template chain can be as long as you like, except circular.

If things made sense until know, we can finally explain arguments of the `render` function. For a template, the first and only argument is the data object. However, instead of just the local `data` object, the `data` argument is actually the result of a deep merge with all `data` objects in the layout chain, as well as with the global data object. For a layout, the `render` function also receives as second argument the string from the output of the previous `render` function. Note, both arguments are copied, therefore manipulating them from inside the function doesn't have any effect, e.g. you can't change the output path by accessing `data.targetPath` from within the `render` function.

<!-- todo: check if there are editor extensions to format languages inside template strings -->

The target path of a template is by default the same relative path in the target directory as in the source directory. For an individaul template, this can be changed by setting the `.targetPath` in the `data` function of the template, or globally for all templates of a given source and target type using [Target path transformations](). 

Note, goose processes templates in a loop and writes out as soon as it's done with one before proceeding to the next. Therefore it can't check if the same targetPath is set for multiple templates. Therefore make sure to not set the same target path for multiple templates, otherwise the previous one is overwritten each time.

