# Layouts

[TOC]


<!-- todo: finish -->

## Introduction

Layouts are partial templates that a template can wrap itself in. Layouts themselves aren't outputted as their own files, but only as part of a template. Note, because layouts aren't outputted, they can have a simple `.js` extension and there is no convention about a double extension.

<!-- ToDo: actually can be with any extension, is just read as JavaScript ?! YES -->

Layouts reside in a top-level layout directory within the source directory, which defaults to `_layouts`. You can customise this using the `...???...` option.

Layouts, similar to templates, can have "frontmatter" in the form of an exported `data` object. This object can contain itself a `layoutPath` property with the path to another layout for chaining of layouts. Note, the path in `layoutPath` is taken relative to the layouts directory, not the directory the current layout is in. For each template, on rendering the data is a deep merge of its own local data, the data of all layouts, and the global data. Data closer to the template overwrites any further away. Note, layouts don't have a special `targetPath` property because they aren't outputted.

Note, a layout filename can actually be whatever you want, including with a "wrong" extension or no extension. As long as template that references it in the `layoutPath` property provides the correct path, it's read in as JavaScript.

Note, you can chain only one single layout to a template / layout. Calling `.layoutPath` multiple times just overwrites the previous value.