# Data

[TOC]


<!-- todo: finish -->

## Introduction



## Template data

<!-- todo: use template data, subset is global data -->
<!-- todo: finish  -->

A template can have frontmatter in form of an exported `data` object, whose properties are available in the `render` function. Each layout can do the same thing, because it's just a special template. But to be useful, the data available in the `render` function is not the one of the invidual template, but the merge of all the layouts that it's chained to. The merge function can be configured, but by default is a deep merge. Note, if you use a custom merge function, it should be capable of taking arbitrarily many arguments, otherwise it will work correctly only for ???templates whose layout chain consists of a single layout and???NO,CHANGED not more than two global data files.

<!-- todo: insert global data file  -->

And to be even more useful, you can create global data files whose data is available in all templates.

goose itself makes no restrictions on the type of data you can put in the `data` object or the default export in case of a global data file. However, since they are all merged, not all data types make much sense. For example, in deep merge two arrays get merged by concatenation, while in shallow merge not. But objects (including functions) never get merged with any primitive value (including arrays). Therefore for data that you want to merge, it's advisable to use objects.

---

Global data files are simple `.js` files that have a default export. The value of their default export is deep merged into a global data object. For each template, the global data object is then deep merged with the data of the template and all its layouts at rendering. This allows for global data that is available in every template and layout.

<!-- ToDo: actually can be with any extension, is just read as JavaScript ?! YES -->

Note, global data has the "lowest priority" in the data chain. This means, an export of any other value type than a (function returning an) object will probably be overwritten, because primitive values don't merge. Note, arrays do merge with each other, but arrays and objects won't. Therefore if you want your data to merge, you should use objects.

Note, the first deep merge is that of any global data files themselves by the order the directory is walked using Deno's [std/fs/walk.ts](https://deno.land/std/fs/walk.ts). The order may not be intuitive, so make sure that the data of the global data files doesn't overwrite each other already.

Only the default export of the global data file is used, and any other export is ignored. If the export is a function, it will be called and it's return value will be used instead. Note, the function can be async (unlike a template `render` function). The function is called without any arguments.

Global data can be used to provide custom functions that can be called from every template (given that they're not overwritten), e.g. inserting snippets, transforming some input, e.g. date string to date, etc.
(in Eleventy called filters)

---

The data exported from template, layout and global data files is not touched by goose and just passed through to the mergeFunction. You must make sure that whatever data you return merges well with the mergeFunction. For simple data types like object literals and arrays this should be well behaved, but more complex data types like functions might require a closer look on the mergeFunction.
