# Transformations


<!-- todo: finish -->

## Introduction

Transformations are functions that transform a rendered template. They are provided by the user in the configuration and can do any arbitrary transformation.

For example, goose doesn't handle Markdown any different than other files, but a transformation to HTML can be easily added using a transformation.

A transformation is a function that takes a string as input and returns another string as output.

Transformations can be added for a given input and output file type in the configuration. Multiple transformations can be added for the same file type, but just make sure to add them in the right order if the order they're executed in for a file matters.

For example, if you want to convert Markdown to HTML and minify it, then you could use

```javascript
.transformation(".md", ".html", markdown)
.transformation(".md", ".html", minify)
```

for some markdown parser and minifier.

Note, the transformation can be async and is properly awaited.

### Target path transformations

A special type of transformations are transformations of the target path of a template. 

A Target path transformation is given the current targetPath as input, and expected to return another string as output.
They take the current targetPath relative to the target directory as input and return a new targetPath as output. 

For example, goose doesn't handle `.html` files any different than other files, but a HTTP server by default looks for an `index.html` in the directory it's given and not for an `[name].html` in the parent directory. Therefore you'd most likely want to rename any `.html` file that isn't already named `index.html` to `index.html` and put it in a subdirectory of it's original name, e.g. `about.html` to `about/index.html`. See the examples for how this can be done with target path transformations

Note, the target path transformation can be async and is properly awaited.