# Incremental build

[TOC]



## Introduction

You can specify an incremental build using the `...???...` option.

On every build goose creates a dependency tree of the content hashes of the source files and saves it as a hidden file `.goose_tree.json` in the output directory. On the next build, if an incremental build is enabled and if such a file is found, goose only reprocesses the source files that changed their content hash or output path. It also tries to delete now invalid files in the target directory.

Note, goose doesn't check if the files in the target directory are actually there, and instead relies solely on the existence of the `.goose_tree.json`. This means that if `.goose_tree.json` is there, but the files are not, because maybe you deleted them, then it won't rebuild them. Conversely, if `.goose_tree.json` is missing, but the files are there, it will rebuild everything and overwrite the files.

Note also, goose doesn't delete files in the target directory that aren't referenced in `.goose_tree.json`. This means it never deletes files in the target directory that it didn't create. This can have unintended consequences, because if you renamed a folder in the target directory, an incremental build won't delete that, and you may have files on your site that you didn't expect. Therefore, if you want a clean incremental build, don't modify files in the target directory. And if you ever need a full build, don't use the incremental option, or make sure to delete the whole target directory, instead of just the files inside it, because you might miss the hidden `.goose_tree.json`.